Hello friends
In this video we're going to discuss about the hexa decimal number system.
In hexadecimal number system
We will group the binary value into four bit groups
See this example this is a large binary number
What we do with hexadecimal system is that
we group these into four bits from right to left like this
The maximum value that can be formed using four bits is 1111
which is equal to decimal 15
So we can call this as a base 16 number system
Hexa decimal number system has values from 0 to 15
to represent numbers beyond 9
hexadecimal uses letters from A to F
that is 10 will be represented as A,
11 as B, 12 as C, 13 as D, 14 as E and finally 15 as F
So see this table with 4 bit binary values and its corresponding decimal and hexa decimal values
for 0000 decimal is 0 and hexa decimal is also 0
till 1001 decimal and hexa decimal values will be the same
That is till 9.
so for 0001 decimal and hexadecimal value  is 1
For 0010 the decimal and hexadecimal value is 2
For 0011 hexadecimal and decimal value is 3
And for 0100 decimal and hexadecimal value will be 4
And  for 0101 the decimal and hexadecimal value is 5
and  for 0110 the decimal and hexadecimal value is 6
and for 0111 the decimal and hexadecimal value is 7
and for 1000 the decimal and hexadecimal value is 8
and for 1001 the decimal and hexadecimal value is 9
now for 1010, the decimal is 10 and hexadecimal is A or a
and for 1011, the decimal is 11 and hexadecimal value is B or b
for 1100, the decimal is 12 and hexadecimal is C or c
for 1101, the decimal is 13 and hexadecimal is d or D
And for 1110, decimal is 14 and hexadecimal is e or E
for 1111, the decimal is 15 and hexadecimal is f or F
So we have to by heart these values
and it will be very easy for us
to convert any binary number to it's equivalent hexadecimal value
and any hexadecimal value to it's equivalent binary value.
So what is the major difference between Octal and Hexadecimal systems?
In the octal system, we had grouped every three bits of a binary number
But in the computer, the memory allocation always happens in the multiples of 4
like 1 byte which is 8 bits.
4 bytes which is 32 bits.
8 bytes which is 64 bits like that.
All are multiples of 4.
so using octal number system is not a good idea
So how can we easily handle computer memory addresses?
The answer is use hexadecimal number system.
In hexa decimal number system
We group every four binary bits
so that we can easily represent computer memory addresses
so it makes life easier as it allows grouping of binary numbers
which makes it easier to read, write and understand
Now let us see how to convert a binary value into it's hexa decimal value.
It is very simple
Make groups of 4 bits from right to left
and replace each group with corresponding hexadecimal value
So we have a binary value here : 10001101
We have to convert it into its hexa decimal value.
So first group it.
So we get 1000 and 1101
So for binary 1000, the hexa decimal value is 8 and for 1101 it is decimal 13 and hexadecimal D
So for binary 10001101, the corresponding hexadecimal value is 8D
So that is how we convert binary to hexadecimal.
Now how to convert hexadecimal value to binary ?
It is also very simple.
Take each digit or character from hexadecimal value and replace it with its 4 bit binary value
So see an example. We have the hexadecimal value FD
So write the corresponding 4 bit binary of F and D.
for F it is 1111 and for D it is 1101
So for the hexadecimal number FD, the equivalent binary value is 11111101.
So today we discussed about Hexadecimal number system or Base 16 number system
In this system we will group every four bits of binary in the right to left direction.
we learned how to convert binary to hexadecimal
just group the bits in size of 4 from right to left
and write the corresponding hexadecimal values of each group
and to convert hexadecimal to binary
Simply write the 4 bit binary value of each digit or character and finally join them.
Also unlike octal system, hexadecimal number system is quite very useful to handle
computer memory addresses since we have groups of 4 bits
So that's all
And in the next video we will discuss about how to convert decimal number to other number systems
So that's all for this video and thank you for watching.